# references/63_rotatekv_accurate_and_robust_2_bit_kv_cache_quantization_for_llms_via_outlier_aware_adaptive_rotations.pdf

<!-- page 1 -->

RotateKV: Accurate and Robust 2-Bit KV Cache Quantization
for LLMs via Outlier-Aware Adaptive Rotations
Zunhai Su1, Zhe Chen2, Wang Shen2, Hanyu Wei1, Linge Li2, Huangqi Yu2, Kehong Yuan1∗
1Tsinghua University, 2Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd
{zh-su23,wei-hy23}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{chenzhe49,shenwang1,lilinge,yuhuangqi}@huawei.com, yuankh@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract
Key-Value (KV) cache facilitates efficient large
language models (LLMs) inference by avoiding re-
computation of past KVs. As the batch size and
context length increase, the oversized KV caches
become a significant memory bottleneck, highlight-
ing the need for efficient compression. Existing
KV quantization rely on fine-grained quantization
or the retention of a significant portion of high bit-
widths caches, both of which compromise com-
pression ratio and often fail to maintain robust-
ness at extremely low average bit-widths. In this
work, we explore the potential of rotation technique
for 2-bit KV quantization and propose RotateKV ,
which achieves accurate and robust performance
through the following innovations: (i) Outlier-
Aware Rotation, which utilizes channel-reordering
to adapt the rotations to varying channel-wise out-
lier distributions without sacrificing the computa-
tional efficiency of the fast Walsh-Hadamard trans-
form (FWHT); (ii) Pre-RoPE Grouped-Head Rota-
tion, which mitigates the impact of rotary position
embedding (RoPE) on proposed outlier-aware rota-
tion and further smooths outliers across heads; (iii)
Attention-Sink-Aware Quantization, which lever-
ages the massive activations to precisely identify
and protect attention sinks. RotateKV achieves less
than 0.3 perplexity (PPL) degradation with 2-bit
quantization on WikiText-2 using LLaMA-2-13B,
maintains strong CoT reasoning and long-context
capabilities, with less than 1.7% degradation on
GSM8K, outperforming existing methods even at
lower average bit-widths. RotateKV also show-
cases a 3.97× reduction in peak memory usage,
supports 5.75× larger batch sizes, and achieves a
2.32× speedup in decoding stage.
1 Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have attracted considerable
attention due to their remarkable capabilities in next-token-
prediction generation tasks [Zhao et al. , 2023 ]. A critical
technique of LLMs is the Key-Value (KV) cache, which
∗Corresponding author.
 Original Key States Outlier-Aware Adaptive Rotation
Quantization Group
Figure 1: The distribution of Keys in Layer 10 of LLaMA-2-7B. The
proposed outlier-aware adaptive rotation demonstrates outstanding
capability in reducing outliers.
avoids recomputation by caching the KVs generated by the
attention layer in each Transformer block [Vaswani, 2017].
However, as the batch size and context length increase, the
growing size of KV caches not only leads to significant mem-
ory consumption, but also renders LLM inference memory-
bound, limiting system throughput[Liu et al., 2024d; Kang et
al., 2024]. Low-bit quantization is widely used to compress
LLMs for enhanced memory and time efficiency, covering
various aspects, including weight-only quantization [Frantar
et al., 2022; Lin et al., 2024b], weight-activation quantization
[Xiao et al., 2023a; Ashkboos et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024c;
Saxena et al. , 2024 ], and KV cache quantization. Existing
studies on KV cache quantization often employ techniques
like fine-grained per-channel quantization [Liu et al., 2024d;
Kang et al., 2024] or mixed-precision quantization [He et al.,
2024; Yang et al., 2024; Duanmu et al., 2024; Hooper et al.,
2024], which retain a significant portion of high bit-widths
caches. As a result, these methods compromise compression
efficiency and fail to maintain robustness under high com-
pression ratio or extremely low average bit-widths.
Recently, Hadamard-transform-based rotation technique
has demonstrated significant effectiveness in mitigating out-
liers in 4-bit LLM quantization, with studies such as [Ashk-
boos et al. , 2024; Liu et al. , 2024c; Saxena et al. , 2024 ]
leveraging rotation technique to achieve 4-bit quantization of
weights, activations and KV caches. However, the potential
of rotation methods for extremely low-bit KV cache quantiza-
tion has yet to be fully explored. In this study, we thoroughly
analyze the limitations of existing KV rotation settings and
propose RotateKV , a tuning-free method that ensures supe-
rior outlier management through the following innovations
(see Figure 1 for an illustrative example):
arXiv:2501.16383v2  [cs.LG]  2 Feb 2025

<!-- page 2 -->

0 250 500 750
1000
1250
1500
1750
2000
T oken
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Channel
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
(a) Layer 10 Head 1
0 250 500 750
1000
1250
1500
1750
2000
T oken
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Channel
0
2
4
6
8
10
12 (b) Layer 10 Head 2
0 250 500 750
1000
1250
1500
1750
2000
T oken
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Channel
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14 (c) Layer 10 Head 30
0 250 500 750
1000
1250
1500
1750
2000
T oken
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Channel
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14 (d) Layer 10 Head 31
Figure 2: Magnitude of of LLaMA-2-7B Keys. A small number of channels exhibit disproportionately large magnitudes, and these outlier
channels vary across different attention heads.
• Outlier-Aware Rotation. Recent research [Liu et al. ,
2024d; Hooper et al. , 2024 ] on outlier behavior in KV
cache highlight the Keys contain a small number of channels
with disproportionately large magnitudes, while these out-
lier channels vary across different attention heads, as shown
in Figure 2. However, existing Key rotation rely on the
fast Walsh-Hadamard transform (FWHT), where the same
Hadamard matrix is applied to each head across all layers.
Although the FWHT reduces the overhead of online compu-
tation, its rotation fails to adapt to the varying distributions
of channel-wise outliers. Through a comprehensive compar-
ative analysis of various outlier-aware strategies, we propose
outlier-aware rotation, which effectively enhances the adapt-
ability of rotation to diverse outlier distributions while main-
taining the computational efficiency of FWHT.
• Pre-RoPE Grouped-Head Rotation. Existing rotations
of Keys are performed by applying the rotation to each head
of the Query and Key after rotary position embedding (RoPE)
[Su et al. , 2024], which presents two significant limitations
that reduce the effectiveness of outlier-aware rotation in mit-
igating outliers. First, RoPE disrupts the channel magnitude
consistency of the Key tensors. Second, applying the rotation
through the attention calculation of each head confines outlier
reduction to individual heads. To address these issues, we
propose a novel pre-RoPE rotation pipeline, which reduces
the impact of RoPE on rotation and enables grouped-head ro-
tation to smooth outliers across multiple heads.
• Attention-Sink-Aware Quantization. Retaining at-
tention sinks [Xiao et al. , 2023b ] is crucial for maintain-
ing model performance during compression [Duanmu et al.,
2024; Hooper et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024b]. Existing meth-
ods primarily focus on retaining sink tokens at the begin-
ning of sequences, overlooking those in other positions [Yu
et al. , 2024; Sun et al. , 2024 ]. Inspired by recent studies
on the interpretability of attention sinks [Sun et al. , 2024;
Guo et al. , 2024 ], we propose attention-sink-aware quanti-
zation, which leverages the correlation between massive ac-
tivations [Sun et al. , 2024 ] and attention sinks to precisely
identify and retain additional salient sink tokens.
With these innovations, RotateKV fully exploits the poten-
tial of rotation for extremely low-bit quantization, address-
ing the limitations of current KV quantization methods and
delivering both accurate and robust 2-bit quantization. Our
contributions are summarized as follows:
• We identify the limitation of existing Key rotation that
applies the same rotation to all attention heads. We propose
outlier-aware rotation, which improves adaptability to diverse
outlier distributions, while maintaining the computational ef-
ficiency of FWHT.
• Building on our analysis of the impact and limitations of
existing post-RoPE rotations, we propose pre-RoPE rotation
that effectively mitigates RoPE’s influence on rotations while
unlocking the potential for grouped-head rotation.
• We propose attention-sink-aware quantization, an inno-
vative approach that provides new insights into identifying
attention sinks and extends the current practice of retaining
only the sink tokens at the beginning of the sequence.
• To the best of our knowledge, RotateKV is the first
method to fully explore and harness the potential of rota-
tion in extremely low-bit KV quantization. Extensive exper-
iments demonstrate that RotateKV outperforms state-of-the-
art methods while achieving higher compression ratio. Ro-
tateKV achieves less than 0.3 perplexity (PPL) degradation
with 2-bit on WikiText-2[Merity et al., 2016] using LLaMA-
2-13B [Touvron et al. , 2023 ]. Evaluations on the GSM8K
[Cobbe et al. , 2021] demonstrates that RotateKV maintains
strong chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning capability, with less
than 1.7% performance degradation compared to FP16 base-
line. RotateKV also exhibits negligible performance degrada-
tion in the 40K context-length Needle-in-a-Haystack (NIAH)
[Fu et al. , 2025 ] test, as well as in eight challenging long-
context and multi-modal tasks chosen from LongBench [Bai
et al. , 2023b] and MileBench [Song et al. , 2024]. With the
current implementation, RotateKV can reduce peak mem-
ory usage by 3.97×, supports 5.75× larger batch sizes, and
achieves a 2.32× decoding speedup.
2 Related Work
2.1 KV Cache Quantization
Quantization reduces the bit-widths of numerical representa-
tion to compress the KV cache, effectively decreasing mem-
ory usage and alleviating the memory-bound challenge. Gen-
erally, existing KV cache quantization methods can be cat-
egorized into two types based on the quantization dimen-
sion of Keys: per-channel and per-token. Due to signifi-
cant outliers along the channel dimension in Keys, methods
such as KIVI [Liu et al. , 2024d], Gear [Kang et al. , 2024],
and KVQuant [Hooper et al., 2024] adopt per-channel quan-
tization to mitigate quantization errors. However, these ap-
proaches often require fine-grained quantization or the reten-
tion of a certain proportion of outliers unquantized to preserve
model performance, both of which compromise the compres-

<!-- page 3 -->

sion ratio. On the other hand, due to the autoregressive na-
ture of LLMs, where tokens are predicted sequentially, per-
token quantization is commonly used in methods such as Zip-
Cache [He et al. , 2024], MiKV [Yang et al. , 2024], SKVQ
[Duanmu et al. , 2024], and other less aggressive KV quan-
tization methods [Ashkboos et al. , 2024; Liu et al. , 2024c;
Shah et al. , 2024 ]. These approaches typically focus on
the saliency differences between tokens, allocating relatively
higher bit-widths to store a significant proportion of salient
tokens. However, this also results in a compromised com-
pression ratio. Unlike these methods, RotateKV employs per-
token quantization but eliminates the need to store large pro-
portions of high-bit caches. Besides, experiments show that
RotateKV offers superior outlier management compared to
per-channel approaches, ensuring robust performance even at
higher compression ratio.
3 Preliminary
3.1 Inference Process of LLMs
The LLM inference process consists of two stages: the prefill
phase and the decoding phase.
Prefill Phase. The model processes the token sequence
generated from the prompt and generates the initial output
token, with each attention layer computing and caching KV
pairs. Let X ∈ Rlprompt×d represent the input embeddings,
where lprompt is the length of the input token sequence and
d is the model’s hidden size. In each attention layer, the KV
cache can be derived as follows:
K = X · Wk, V = X · Wv, (1)
Kcache ← K, Vcache ← V, (2)
where Wk, Wv ∈ Rd×d are the weight matrices for the Key
and Value calculations, respectively.
Decoding Phase. The model takes a single token as input.
Let t ∈ R1×d as the input embedding. Each attention layer
computes tQ, tK and tV as follows:
tQ = t · Wq, tK = t · Wk, tV = t · Wv. (3)
Then, tK and tV are employed to update the KV cache, with
the complete KV cache supporting subsequent computations.
K ← concat(Kcache, tK), V ← concat(Vcache, tV ), (4)
tO = softmax(tQ · K ⊤ · d− 1
2 ) · V. (5)
3.2 Quantization
The n-bit asymmetric integer quantization and dequantization
processes can be expressed as:
Q(X) = clamp
 X
scale

+ zero, 0, 2n − 1

, (6)
X ′ = scale · (Q(X) − zero), (7)
scale = clipped max(X) − clipped min(X)
2n − 1 , (8)
zero = −
 clipped min(X)
scale

, (9)
where ⌊·⌉ indicates round operation. Q(X) and X ′ denote
the quantized and dequantized values of X. The clamp
operation constrains the values within a specified range.
clipped max(X) and clipped min(X) denote the opera-
tions that truncate the maximum and minimum values of X.
3.3 Hadamard Matrix
Hadamard Matrix R is a specific type of orthogonal ma-
trix characterized by entries proportional to {+1, −1}. The
Hadamard matrix also satisfies the definition of a rotation ma-
trix, as it is an orthogonal matrix with det(R) = 1 . QuIP
[Chee et al., 2024] demonstrates that multiplying an rotation
matrix leads to a reduction in the maximum entry relative to
its norm, effectively mitigating outliers and enhancing quan-
tizability. Walsh-Hadamard Matrix is a particular instance of
Hadamard matrix generated recursively as follows, the sub-
script denoting the dimension of matrix, where k ∈ Z+:
H1 = [1] , H 2k = 1√
2

H2(k−1) H2(k−1)
H2(k−1) −H2(k−1)

. (10)
The scaling factor 1√
2 ensures normalization. The recur-
sive structure of the Walsh-Hadamard matrix enables efficient
computation via the FWHT algorithm [Hedayat and Wallis,
1978], reducing computational complexity of matrix-vector
multiplication to O(n log n), where n represents the dimen-
sion of the matrix.
4 Methodology
Section 4.1 outlines the limitations of existing outlier-
unaware Key rotation and proposes outlier-aware rotation.
In Section 4.2, we analyze the impact of RoPE on rotation,
then propose pre-RoPE grouped-head rotation. Section 4.3
further introduces attention-sink-aware quantization. Sec-
tion 4.4 provides a comprehensive summary of RotateKV .
The overview of RotateKV is illustrated in Figure 3.
4.1 Outlier-Aware Rotation
Existing Outlier-Unaware Key Rotation
When applying quantization, outliers pose a persistent chal-
lenge as they expand the quantization range, reducing the ef-
fective bits available for most values. Recently, LLM quan-
tization research [Chee et al. , 2024; Ashkboos et al. , 2024;
Liu et al. , 2024c; Saxena et al. , 2024; Lin et al. , 2024a;
Shah et al., 2024] has focused on Hadamard-transform-based
rotation technique, which involves multiplying a Hadamard
matrix to reduce outliers and improve quantizability. As
shown in Figure 4, existing rotations within the attention layer
can be classified into two categories: offline rotations (e.g.,
R1 and R2), which can be fused into the weights prior to
inference to eliminate the overhead of online computations,
and online rotations (e.g., R3), which are performed dynam-
ically using the FWHT. This differentiation exists because
the Query and Key computation relies on RoPE, rendering
it incompatible with offline rotations. To reduce the com-
putational overhead during inference, Key rotations typically
utilize the efficient FWHT algorithm. For example, QuaRot
[Ashkboos et al., 2024] leverages offline random Hadamard
matrices and online FWHT to achieve outlier-free 4-bit LLM
inference. SpinQuant [Liu et al., 2024c] employs Cayley op-
timization to enhance offline rotation but continues to utilize
the FWHT for online rotations. Due to the structure of the
Walsh-Hadamard matrix, as shown in Equation 10, the rota-
tions for each attention head with the same dimension rely
on the same Walsh-Hadamard matrix. This constraint limits
adaptability to varying channel-wise outlier distributions.

<!-- page 4 -->

R P
Multi-Head
Self-attention
① Outlier-Aware Pre-RoPE Grouped-Head Rotation
WQ
WK
WV R
RoPE
RoPEP-1
Softmax
WOR-1GHR P GHR-1
Fused Weights
GHR
Grouped-Head
Rotation
Outlier-Aware
Reordering
Online
Operation
KV Cache
Quantization
② Attention-Sink-Aware Quantization
…
Multi-Head
Self-Attention
Feed-Forward
Network
Transformer
Block n-1
Transformer
Block n
Transformer
Block n+1
…
Massive Activations
keep      tokens in FP16
to perserve attention sinks
Attention
Scores
token A token BRotation
token A token B
Multi-Head
Self-Attention
Figure 3: Overview of RotateKV . On the left is the outlier-aware rotation combined with the pre-RoPE pipeline. On the right, we demonstrate
attention-sink-aware quantization. Since attention is concentrated on the massive activations, we can identify attention sinks in the current
attention layer by utilizing the token indices of these massive activations from the output of the previous decoder block.
Wembed R1
Multi-Head
Self-AttentionR1-1 R1
Feed-Forward
NetworkR1-1 R1... ... WheadR1-1
WQR1-1
WKR1-1
WVR1-1 R2
RoPE
RoPE
R3
R3-1
Softmax
WOR2-1 R1
Fused Weights
R1 R2
Offline Rotation
R3
Online Rotation
Multi-Head
Self-Attention
Figure 4: Existing rotation paradigm.
Outlier-Aware Rotation
While adjusting rotation for pre-rotation distributions seems
straightforward, it is impractical. Modifying the Hadamard
matrices invalidates the FWHT algorithm, increases com-
putational overhead, and necessitates storing multiple ma-
trices, thereby further reducing compression ratio. To
adapt rotations to varying channel-wise outlier distributions
without compromising the efficiency of FWHT, we intro-
duce the outlier-aware rotation, which preserves the FWHT
while enhancing it with outlier-aware operation derived from
lightweight calibration. We conduct experiments using var-
ious enhancement strategies, including smoothing and re-
ordering. Smoothing [Xiao et al. , 2023a; Lin et al. , 2024c]
scales down the Keys by per-channel factors λ and corre-
spondingly scaling up the associated channels in the Query:
Q · KT = (QΛ) · (KΛ−1)T , Λ = diag(λ). (11)
Reordering arranges channels across all heads to reduce out-
liers within each quantization group. As shown in Table 1,
experiments on different outlier-aware strategies demonstrate
that smoothing fails to maintain performance at 2-bit quanti-
zation. For reordering, we find that relying on clustering or
other complex permutation methods is unnecessary. Instead,
reordering the channels of each token using the indices sorted
by the values after rotation can effectively reduce quantiza-
tion errors (Table 2) and improve PPL. Notably, the channel
reordering indices are derived through fast calibration and re-
main consistent across all tokens throughout inference. The
calibration procedure is detailed in Algorithm 1.
4.2 Pre-RoPE Grouped-Head Rotation
Existing Post-RoPE Key Rotation
Recent LLMs, including LLaMA[Touvron et al., 2023], Mis-
tral [Jiang et al. , 2023 ] and Qwen [Bai et al. , 2023a ] use
RoPE [Su et al. , 2024] to encode token positions. The po-
sitional encoding introduced by RoPE is applied to pairs of
channels, resulting in a reduction of magnitude consistency
Methods LLaMA-2-7B PPL↓
16bit 4bit 3bit 2bit
Rotate-Only
5.47
5.62 6.16 8.05Smooth-Only 5.71 6.65 16.97Reorder-Only 5.73 6.47 8.26
Rotate + Smooth 5.62 6.13 6.93Smooth + Rotate 5.61 6.02 6.83
Rotate + Reorder 5.63 6.07 6.33Reorder + Rotate 7.43 36.94 231.43
Table 1: Experiments on different outlier-aware strategies. We eval-
uate PPL with a sequence length of 2048 using the LLaMA-2-7B
model on the WikiText-2 dataset.
Algorithm 1: Calibration for Reordering Indices
Input: Key states after rotation: K ∈ Rb×h×s×d
Parameter: Number of layers: L, batch size: b,
number of attention heads: h, sequence length: s,
dimensionality of each head: d.
Output: Reordering indices Pl for each layer
l ∈ {1, 2, . . . , L}
1: for l = 1 to L do
2: Reshape K ∈ Rbs×hd.
3: Compute channel suml =Pbs
i=1 K[i, :].
4: Sort indices: Pl = argsort(channel suml).
5: end for
6: return Pl for each l ∈ {1, 2, . . . , L}.
within individual channel, as shown in Figure 6. Previous
work [Hooper et al., 2024] also highlights that RoPE affects
per-channel quantization performance. In this study, we ob-
serve that the inconsistency in the magnitudes of channel-
wise outliers significantly undermines the effectiveness of
outlier-aware rotation. As demonstrated in Table 2, the quan-
tization error increases by 145% after applying RoPE.
Pre-RoPE Grouped-Head Rotation
To address the issues associated with post-RoPE rotation, we
introduce a novel pipeline that applies the outlier-aware rota-
tion before RoPE. As illustrated in Figure 3, this design not
only eliminates RoPE’s negative impact on rotation but also
facilitates the incorporation of rotation and reordering opera-
tions into the weights, thus requiring only the inverse opera-
tion during inference. The proposed pre-RoPE rotation also
enables grouped-head combined rotation, allowing for more
effective outlier reduction across heads. Although increasing
the head numbers improves PPL, it also incurs higher com-

<!-- page 5 -->

(a) Outputs of Decoder Block 10.
...
... (b) In this example, attention sinks are observed at tokens 0 and 110.
Figure 5: Visualizations of Decoder Block 10 outputs and the attention scores in Attention Layer 11 from the LLaMA-2-7B using input from
WikiText-2 dataset. As shown in Figure 5a, massive activations occur at tokens 0 and 110, in channels 1415 and 2533. In the subsequent
attention layer, attention is focused on tokens 1 and 110 across all heads, as illustrated in Figure 5b.
0 250 500 750
1000
1250
1500
1750
2000
T oken
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Channel
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
(a) Key states before RoPE.
0 250 500 750
1000
1250
1500
1750
2000
T oken
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Channel
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14 (b) Key states after RoPE.
0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0 12.5 15.0
Before RoPE
After RoPE
(c) Distribution of Channel 51 before and after RoPE.
Figure 6: Figures 6a and 6b illustrate the Key of LLaMA-2-7B,
Layer 10, Head 31, before and after RoPE respectively. Figure 6c
presents the distribution of the outlier channel.
Methods MSE↓
Pre-RoPE Post-RoPE
Rotation 0.632 0.670
+ Reordering 0.247 0.605
Reordering 0.477 0.568
+ Rotation NaN NaN
Table 2: We assess the reconstruction error of the Key in LLaMA-
2-7B under 2-bit quantization, using mean squared error (MSE) as
the metric. The results indicate that RoPE significantly affects the
effectiveness of outlier-aware rotation.
putational costs. Therefore, it is crucial to balance computa-
tional overhead and performance gains when determining the
group size. Typically, as shown in Table 3, a group size of 4
heads is considered a reasonable choice.
4.3 Attention-Sink-Aware Quantization
The research [Xiao et al., 2023b] indicates that LLMs tend to
treat the initial token as a ’sink’, assigning it disproportion-
ately high attention scores. Moreover, [Hooper et al., 2024;
Duanmu et al. , 2024; Liu et al. , 2024b ] highlight that the
KVs associated with sink tokens are sensitive to quantiza-
tion, and retaining only the initial token in FP16 can effec-
tively enhance quantization. However, more recent studies
[Yu et al., 2024; Sun et al., 2024] suggest that these few-in-
Heads
per Group
Numbers of
Group
Dimension of
Rotation Matrix
FLOPs
/Layer
LLaMA-2-7B
PPL↓
1 32 128 28672 7.81
2 16 256 32768 7.24
4 8 512 36864 6.99
8 4 1024 40960 6.91
16 2 2048 45056 6.98
32 1 4096 49152 6.86
Table 3: Experiments on group size of grouped-head rotation. The
PPL is evaluated on the LLaMA-2-7B using WikiText-2 dataset.
number attention sinks can emerge not only at the initial token
but also at various other positions, whereas existing practices
fail to retain them precisely. One key reason is that efficient
attention computation relies on kernels such as FlashAtten-
tion [Shah et al. , 2024], which directly output the attention
results without exposing the intermediate attention scores.
This prevents the dynamic identification of additional atten-
tion sinks beyond those fixed at the initial token. Inspired by
recent studies on the interpretability of attention sinks [Sun
et al. , 2024; Guo et al. , 2024 ], we propose attention-sink-
aware quantization, which leverages massive activations to
identify additional sink tokens without relying on attention
scores, thereby precisely retaining them during the quanti-
zation process. Research on massive activations [Sun et al.,
2024]—those activations in the residual sums of Transformer
block outputs with significantly larger magnitudes than oth-
ers—suggests that attention is concentrated on these activa-
tions. Specifically, when massive activations occur, the corre-
sponding tokens attract concentrated attention, forming atten-
tion sinks. Figure 5 provides a real example from LLaMA-
2-7B [Touvron et al. , 2023 ]. Therefore, by identifying the
massive activations, additional sink tokens can be pinpointed.
The process of attention-sink-aware quantization is outlined
in Figure 3.
4.4 Summary of RotateKV
In summary, RotateKV first performs fast calibration to ob-
tain reordering indices, then integrates grouped-head rotation
and channel reordering into the Key weights. These opera-
tions result in outlier-aware rotation of the Keys, making them
more suitable for quantization. After updating the KV cache,
inverse online reordering and rotation are applied. For the
Value, we adopt a simple offline rotation as shown in Figure
3, since Values do not contain outliers like Keys.

<!-- page 6 -->

Methods WikiText-2 PPL↓
LLaMA2-7B LLaMA2-13B LLaMA3-8B Mistral7B
FP16 5.12 4.57 5.75 4.91
QuaRot-4bit5.15 4.60 5.83 4.93KVQuant-4bit5.14 4.59 5.79 4.94RotateKV-4bit5.13 4.58 5.79 4.92
QuaRot-3bit5.33 4.72 6.21 5.05KVQuant-3bit5.20 4.65 5.95 4.99RotateKV-3bit5.20 4.64 5.94 4.97
QuaRot-2bit8.94 6.96 21.43 6.62KVQuant-2bit5.59 4.95 6.75 5.34RotateKV-2bit5.50 4.84 6.69 5.24
Table 4: PPL evaluations on WikiText-2 with a sequence length of
4096. For both QuaRot and our method, the quantization group size
was set to 128. For KVQuant, we adopted the scheme of retaining
0.5% of numerical outliers in full precision during quantization.
5 Experiments
5.1 Experiment Settings
Models and Tasks.
To validate the robustness of our method, we evaluate Ro-
tateKV on a variety of challenging tasks using both LLMs
and visual-language models (VLMs), including LLaMA-2-
7B/13B [Touvron et al., 2023], LLaV A-v1.5-7B/13B[Liu et
al., 2024a ], Mistral-7B [Jiang et al. , 2023 ], LLaV A-v1.6-
Mistral-7B [Liu et al. , 2023 ], LLaMA-3-8B [Dubey et al. ,
2024], and LLaMA-2-7B-80K [Fu et al. , 2024 ]. We begin
by evaluating the PPL on the WikiText-2 dataset [Merity et
al., 2016]. Then, evaluation on the GSM8k dataset with CoT
prompting is conducted to assess RotateKV’s capability in
handling complex CoT reasoning task. We further test long-
context and multi-modal tasks accuracy across eight tasks
from the LongBench[Bai et al., 2023b] and MileBench [Song
et al. , 2024 ]. To assess RotateKV’s performance with ex-
tremely long contexts, we also evaluate it on the 40K context-
length Needle-in-a-Haystack (NIAH) test using the LLaMA-
2-7B-80K [Fu et al., 2024] model. The source code for repro-
ducing the results and generating the visualizations is avail-
able at https://github.com/ZunhaiSu/RotateKV.
Quantization Settings.
We employ per-token asymmetric integer quantization for
both Keys and Values, setting the quantization group size of
RotateKV to 128 across all evaluations to demonstrate the
accuracy and robustness of our method at relatively coarse
quantization granularity. The group size for grouped-head
rotation is consistently set to 4 across all the models and
tasks we tested. We employ FP8 to store the scale parame-
ters and INT8 for the zero-points, since this approach does
not affect the results but improves the overall compression
rate. The calibration process is highly efficient, taking less
than five minutes on a single RTX 4090 GPU for the LLaMA-
2-7B model using the WikiText-2 dataset. Additionally, the
evaluation results demonstrate that calibration performed on
WikiText-2 generalizes effectively to other datasets.
5.2 Main Results and Analysis
Perplexity Evaluation.
We use the original KV rotation and quantization scheme
from QuaRot [Ashkboos et al. , 2024 ] as one of the base-
lines to highlight the improvements of our proposed adap-
tive rotations. Additionally, we include KVQuant [Hooper
Methods GSM8K (8-shot) Accuracy↑ AverageBitsLLaMA2-7B LLaMA2-13B LLaMA3-8B Mistral7B
FP16 14.18 25.40 51.33 42.68 16
KIVI 13.19 24.64 43.44 39.12 2.50GEAR 12.96 22.74 44.88 39.50 4.03MiKV 9.02 21.00 30.93 36.47 3.23ZipCache 13.50 25.02 49.20 41.32 3.23RotateKV13.95 25.09 50.49 42.99 2.25
Table 5: Evaluations on GSM8K with 8-shot CoT prompting.
et al. , 2024 ] for PPL comparison, which leverages several
techniques such as non-uniform quantization and per-vector
dense-and-sparse quantization, demonstrating state-of-the-art
PPL result. To ensure a fair comparison, for QuaRot we
only quantize the KV cache, and for KVQuant, we adopt the
scheme that preserves 0.5% FP16 outliers, which aligns the
average bit-widths of our approach. As shown in Table 4,
compared with the FP16 baseline, RotateKV shows a PPL
degradation of 0.01 at 4-bit quantization, less than 0.1 at 3-
bit, and less than 0.3 at 2-bit on LLaMA-2-13B. Compared to
QuaRot, which exhibits significant PPL degradation at 2-bit
quantization, our method remains effective even at extremely
low bit widths. Compared to KVQuant, RotateKV consis-
tently demonstrates a PPL improvement of around 0.1 at 2-bit
quantization across all LLMs we tested. Notably, RotateKV
uses the simpler integer quantization.
GSM8K Evaluation.
The GSM8K dataset [Cobbe et al. , 2021 ] is widely used
to evaluate the arithmetic reasoning capabilities of LLMs.
This task presents significant challenges and evaluations on
it can effectively show the impact of compression meth-
ods on model performance. As shown in the Table 5, Ro-
tateKV maintains strong CoT reasoning capabilities, with less
than 1.7% performance degradation compared FP16 baseline.
It outperforms existing methods even at lower average bit-
widths, demonstrating the robustness of our approach. No-
tably, lower average bit-widths lead to higher compression
ratio, enabling support for longer context lengths and larger
batch sizes on the same GPU setup.
LongBench and MileBench Evaluations.
To further demonstrate the robustness of RotateKV , we con-
duct experiments on eight long-context and multi-modal tasks
selected from LongBench [Bai et al., 2023b] and MileBench
[Song et al. , 2024]. For comparison, we include KIVI [Liu
et al., 2024d], which uses per-channel Key quantization and
shows negligible performance degradation with a group size
of 32. As shown in Table 6, compared to the FP16 baseline,
KIVI with a 128 quantization group size [Liu et al., 2024d]
exhibits significant performance degradation of 46.5% on the
LLaMA-2-7B and LLaV A-v1.5-7B models. In contrast, our
method demonstrates negligible average accuracy loss at the
same quantization group size, with less than 1.4% perfor-
mance loss on Mistral-7B and LLaV A-v1.6-Mistral-7B.
Needle-in-a-Haystack Evaluation.
The NIAH task is designed to evaluate the ability to retrieve
specific information within a large body of unrelated data.
In our experiments, we utilize a context length of 40K, seg-
mented into 40 intervals. Within each interval, the needle is
positioned at 10 different depths of the context for evaluation.

<!-- page 7 -->

MethodsBenchmarks LongBench Benchmarks MileBench Avg.Tasks QMSum LCC SAMSum TriviaQATasks SceneTransitionMovingAttributeEgocentricNavigationDocumentVQA
Metrics Rouge-L Edit Sim Rouge-L F1 Metrics Accuracy Accuracy Accuracy Accuracy
FP16 LLaMA-2-7B
21.1 66.7 41.3 87.4 LLaV A-v1.5-7B
73.0 47.5 33.5 45.5 52.0KIVI 12.3 44.4 27.3 38.6 34.5 25.5 21.0 19.0 27.8RotateKV 21.3 66.7 41.7 87.7 67.5 37.0 27.0 29.0 47.2
FP16 LLaMA-2-13B
21.3 66.6 43.5 87.4 LLaV A-v1.5-13B
70.5 50.0 26.5 46.0 51.5KIVI 20.6 45.6 33.1 75.7 64.0 40.0 25.5 33.0 42.2RotateKV 21.4 66.6 43.5 87.4 64.5 46.0 28.0 40.0 49.7
FP16 Mistral-7B
20.4 67.3 43.2 89.2 LLaV A-v1.6-Mistral-7B
71.0 44.0 34.5 38.0 51.0KIVI 19.0 58.3 41.0 81.6 67.5 47.0 28.0 40.0 47.8RotateKV 20.5 67.4 42.9 89.2 64.5 46.0 29.5 42.0 50.3
Table 6: Evaluations across a range of tasks from LongBench and MileBnech. The quantization is all set to 2-bit. For KIVI, the group size
and the residual length are all set to 128. For RotateKV , the group size is set to 128.
10002000300040005000600070008000900010000110001200013000140001500016000170001800019000200002100022000230002400025000260002700028000290003000031000320003300034000350003600037000380003900040000
T oken Limit
0.0
11.0
22.0
33.0
44.0
56.0
67.0
78.0
89.0
100.0 Depth Percent
LLaMA-2-7B-80K (FP16) Acc.: 86.44%
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Score
10002000300040005000600070008000900010000110001200013000140001500016000170001800019000200002100022000230002400025000260002700028000290003000031000320003300034000350003600037000380003900040000
T oken Limit
0.0
11.0
22.0
33.0
44.0
56.0
67.0
78.0
89.0
100.0 Depth Percent
LLaMA-2-7B-80K (RotateKV) Acc: 86.40%
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Score
Figure 7: NIAH evaluation on the LLaMA-2-7B-80K model with a 40K context length.
0 40 80 120 160 200 240 280 320 360 400 440
Batch Size
0
24
48
72
96
120
144
168
192Peak Memory Usage(GB)
OOM
FP16
RotateKV
(a) Memory evaluation.
20 40 60 80
Batch Size
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.2
2.4
2.6Speedup
1.35x
1.81x
2.17x
2.32x
FP16
RotateKV (b) Speed evaluation.
Figure 8: Efficiency analysis of RotateKV .
Figure 7 demonstrates that RotateKV preserves retrieval ca-
pabilities with 2-bit KV cache quantization, underscoring the
robustness of RotateKV in extremely long context scenarios.
5.3 Ablation Study
Ablation Study of the Proposed Innovations
Starting with the original rotation method from QuaRot
[Ashkboos et al. , 2024 ], we progressively incorporate the
proposed innovations to evaluate their individual contribu-
tions. As shown in Table 7, the innovations introduced by
RotateKV effectively mitigate PPL degradation.
Ablation Study on Quantization Granularity
To assess the impact of finer quantization granularity, we per-
form PPL evaluations with group sizes of 64 and 32. The
results in Table 8 demonstrate that RotateKV continues to
achieve better model performance preservation at smaller
quantization group sizes. For instance, the PPL only drops
by 0.18 on the LLaMA-2-13B model at 2-bit with a group
size of 32.
5.4 Efficiency Analysis
In this section, we evaluate the efficiency of the current im-
plementation. We use Triton[Tillet et al., 2019] for the quan-
tization and dequantization kernels, along with an optimized
CUDA kernel for FWHT, following [Dao, 2024 ]. Evalua-
tions are conducted on LLaMA-2-7B [Liu et al., 2024a] with
LLaMA-2-13B PPL ↓
FP16 4.57Original Rotations 6.96 (2.39 ↑)
+ Pre-RoPE Grouped-Head Key Rotation 5.67 (1.29↓)+ Attention-Sink-Aware Quantization 5.52 (0.15↓)+ Outlier-Aware Rotations 4.84 (0.68↓)
+ Scale (FP8) & Zero-Point (INT8) 4.84
Table 7: Ablation study of the proposed innovations. We evaluate
the PPL of 2-bit quantization with a sequence length of 4096 using
the LLaMA-2-13B model on the WikiText-2 dataset.
GroupSize LLaMA-2-13B PPL↓
16bit 4bit 3bit 2bit
128 4.57 4.58 4.64 4.8464 4.58 4.64 4.8132 4.58 4.66 4.75
Table 8: Experiments on quantization granularity using the LLaMA-
2-13B on the WikiText-2 dataset with a sequence length of 4096.
a 8-NVIDIA 4090D (24GB) setup, FlashAttention [Shah et
al., 2024] enabled. The batch size is progressively increased
with an input length of 500 tokens until an out-of-memory
(OOM) error occurs. As shown in Figure 8a, RotateKV re-
duces peak memory usage by 3.97× compared to the FP16
baseline and supports 5.75× larger batch sizes. In terms of
speed, RotateKV achieves a 2.32× speedup during the decod-
ing phase, as shown in Figure 8b. Notably, the efficiency can
be further improved through techniques like kernel fusion.
6 Conclusion
In this paper, we explore the potential of rotation technique
for 2-bit KV quantization. With the proposed innovations,
RotateKV adaptively rotates the KV cache in an outlier-aware
manner, demonstrating outstanding outliers control. Compre-
hensive evaluations show that RotateKV effectively preserves
model performance even at high compression ratio, address-
ing the limitations of existing KV quantization methods and
demonstrating state-of-the-art performance in both compres-
sion efficiency and accuracy. Future work will focus on opti-
mize RotateKV’s implementation to further reduce the over-
head associated with online operation during LLM inference.

<!-- page 8 -->

References
[Ashkboos et al., 2024] Saleh Ashkboos, Amirkeivan Mo-
htashami, Maximilian L Croci, Bo Li, Martin Jaggi, Dan
Alistarh, Torsten Hoefler, and James Hensman. Quarot:
Outlier-free 4-bit inference in rotated llms. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2404.00456, 2024.
[Bai et al., 2023a] Jinze Bai, Shuai Bai, Yunfei Chu, Zeyu
Cui, Kai Dang, Xiaodong Deng, Yang Fan, Wenbin Ge,
Yu Han, Fei Huang, et al. Qwen technical report. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2309.16609, 2023.
[Bai et al., 2023b] Yushi Bai, Xin Lv, Jiajie Zhang,
Hongchang Lyu, Jiankai Tang, Zhidian Huang, Zhengxiao
Du, Xiao Liu, Aohan Zeng, Lei Hou, et al. Longbench:
A bilingual, multitask benchmark for long context
understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.14508, 2023.
[Chee et al., 2024] Jerry Chee, Yaohui Cai, V olodymyr
Kuleshov, and Christopher M De Sa. Quip: 2-bit quantiza-
tion of large language models with guarantees. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36, 2024.
[Cobbe et al., 2021] Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Moham-
mad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser,
Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro
Nakano, Christopher Hesse, and John Schulman. Train-
ing verifiers to solve math word problems. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2110.14168, 2021.
[Dao, 2024] Tri Dao. Fast hadamard transform in cuda, with
a pytorch interface, 2024.
[Duanmu et al., 2024] Haojie Duanmu, Zhihang Yuan, Xi-
uhong Li, Jiangfei Duan, Xingcheng Zhang, and Dahua
Lin. Skvq: Sliding-window key and value cache quan-
tization for large language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2405.06219, 2024.
[Dubey et al., 2024] Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri,
Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle,
Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang,
Angela Fan, et al. The llama 3 herd of models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2407.21783, 2024.
[Frantar et al., 2022] Elias Frantar, Saleh Ashkboos, Torsten
Hoefler, and Dan Alistarh. Gptq: Accurate post-training
quantization for generative pre-trained transformers.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2210.17323, 2022.
[Fu et al., 2024] Yao Fu, Rameswar Panda, Xinyao Niu, Xi-
ang Yue, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Yoon Kim, and Hao Peng.
Data engineering for scaling language models to 128k con-
text. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.10171, 2024.
[Fu et al., 2025] Yao Fu, Rameswar Panda, Xinyao Niu, Xi-
ang Yue, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Yoon Kim, and Hao Peng.
Data engineering for scaling language models to 128k con-
text. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference
on Machine Learning, ICML’24. JMLR.org, 2025.
[Guo et al., 2024] Tianyu Guo, Druv Pai, Yu Bai, Jiantao
Jiao, Michael I Jordan, and Song Mei. Active-
dormant attention heads: Mechanistically demystify-
ing extreme-token phenomena in llms. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2410.13835, 2024.
[He et al., 2024] Yefei He, Luoming Zhang, Weijia Wu, Jing
Liu, Hong Zhou, and Bohan Zhuang. Zipcache: Accu-
rate and efficient kv cache quantization with salient token
identification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.14256, 2024.
[Hedayat and Wallis, 1978] A Hedayat and Walter Dennis
Wallis. Hadamard matrices and their applications. The
annals of statistics, pages 1184–1238, 1978.
[Hooper et al., 2024] Coleman Hooper, Sehoon Kim, Hiva
Mohammadzadeh, Michael W Mahoney, Yakun Sophia
Shao, Kurt Keutzer, and Amir Gholami. Kvquant: To-
wards 10 million context length llm inference with kv
cache quantization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.18079 ,
2024.
[Jiang et al., 2023] Albert Q Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles,
Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot,
Diego de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel,
Guillaume Lample, Lucile Saulnier, et al. Mistral 7b.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06825, 2023.
[Kang et al., 2024] Hao Kang, Qingru Zhang, Souvik
Kundu, Geonhwa Jeong, Zaoxing Liu, Tushar Krishna,
and Tuo Zhao. Gear: An efficient kv cache compression
recipe for near-lossless generative inference of llm, 2024.
[Lin et al., 2024a] Haokun Lin, Haobo Xu, Yichen Wu,
Jingzhi Cui, Yingtao Zhang, Linzhan Mou, Linqi Song,
Zhenan Sun, and Ying Wei. Duquant: Distributing outliers
via dual transformation makes stronger quantized llms. In
The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems, 2024.
[Lin et al., 2024b] Ji Lin, Jiaming Tang, Haotian Tang,
Shang Yang, Wei-Ming Chen, Wei-Chen Wang, Guangx-
uan Xiao, Xingyu Dang, Chuang Gan, and Song Han.
Awq: Activation-aware weight quantization for on-device
llm compression and acceleration. Proceedings of Ma-
chine Learning and Systems , 6:87–100, 2024.
[Lin et al., 2024c] Yujun Lin, Haotian Tang, Shang Yang,
Zhekai Zhang, Guangxuan Xiao, Chuang Gan, and Song
Han. Qserve: W4a8kv4 quantization and system co-design
for efficient llm serving.arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.04532,
2024.
[Liu et al., 2023] Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Yuheng Li, and
Yong Jae Lee. Improved baselines with visual instruction
tuning, 2023.
[Liu et al., 2024a] Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu,
and Yong Jae Lee. Visual instruction tuning. Advances in
neural information processing systems, 36, 2024.
[Liu et al., 2024b] Ruikang Liu, Haoli Bai, Haokun Lin,
Yuening Li, Han Gao, Zhengzhuo Xu, Lu Hou, Jun Yao,
and Chun Yuan. Intactkv: Improving large language
model quantization by keeping pivot tokens intact. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2403.01241, 2024.
[Liu et al., 2024c] Zechun Liu, Changsheng Zhao, Igor Fe-
dorov, Bilge Soran, Dhruv Choudhary, Raghuraman Kr-
ishnamoorthi, Vikas Chandra, Yuandong Tian, and Tijmen
Blankevoort. Spinquant–llm quantization with learned ro-
tations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.16406, 2024.

<!-- page 9 -->

[Liu et al., 2024d] Zirui Liu, Jiayi Yuan, Hongye Jin,
Shaochen Zhong, Zhaozhuo Xu, Vladimir Braverman,
Beidi Chen, and Xia Hu. Kivi: A tuning-free asym-
metric 2bit quantization for kv cache. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.02750, 2024.
[Merity et al., 2016] Stephen Merity, Caiming Xiong, James
Bradbury, and Richard Socher. Pointer sentinel mixture
models, 2016.
[Saxena et al., 2024] Utkarsh Saxena, Sayeh Sharify,
Kaushik Roy, and Xin Wang. Resq: Mixed-precision
quantization of large language models with low-rank
residuals. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.14363, 2024.
[Shah et al., 2024] Jay Shah, Ganesh Bikshandi, Ying
Zhang, Vijay Thakkar, Pradeep Ramani, and Tri
Dao. Flashattention-3: Fast and accurate attention
with asynchrony and low-precision. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2407.08608, 2024.
[Song et al., 2024] Dingjie Song, Shunian Chen, Guim-
ing Hardy Chen, Fei Yu, Xiang Wan, and Benyou Wang.
Milebench: Benchmarking mllms in long context. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2404.18532, 2024.
[Su et al., 2024] Jianlin Su, Murtadha Ahmed, Yu Lu,
Shengfeng Pan, Wen Bo, and Yunfeng Liu. Roformer: En-
hanced transformer with rotary position embedding. Neu-
rocomputing, 568:127063, 2024.
[Sun et al., 2024] Mingjie Sun, Xinlei Chen, J Zico Kolter,
and Zhuang Liu. Massive activations in large language
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.17762, 2024.
[Tillet et al., 2019] P. Tillet, H. T. Kung, and D. Cox. Triton:
an intermediate language and compiler for tiled neural net-
work computations. In Proceedings of the 3rd ACM SIG-
PLAN International Workshop on Machine Learning and
Programming Languages, pages 10–19. ACM, 2019.
[Touvron et al., 2023] Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin
Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei,
Nikolay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava,
Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open foundation and
fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288,
2023.
[Vaswani, 2017] A Vaswani. Attention is all you need. Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2017.
[Xiao et al., 2023a] Guangxuan Xiao, Ji Lin, Mickael
Seznec, Hao Wu, Julien Demouth, and Song Han.
Smoothquant: Accurate and efficient post-training quanti-
zation for large language models. In International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning , pages 38087–38099. PMLR,
2023.
[Xiao et al., 2023b] Guangxuan Xiao, Yuandong Tian, Beidi
Chen, Song Han, and Mike Lewis. Efficient stream-
ing language models with attention sinks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2309.17453, 2023.
[Yang et al., 2024] June Yong Yang, Byeongwook Kim,
Jeongin Bae, Beomseok Kwon, Gunho Park, Eunho Yang,
Se Jung Kwon, and Dongsoo Lee. No token left be-
hind: Reliable kv cache compression via importance-
aware mixed precision quantization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.18096, 2024.
[Yu et al., 2024] Zhongzhi Yu, Zheng Wang, Yonggan Fu,
Huihong Shi, Khalid Shaikh, and Yingyan Celine Lin. Un-
veiling and harnessing hidden attention sinks: Enhancing
large language models without training through attention
calibration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.15765, 2024.
[Zhao et al., 2023] Wayne Xin Zhao, Kun Zhou, Junyi Li,
Tianyi Tang, Xiaolei Wang, Yupeng Hou, Yingqian
Min, Beichen Zhang, Junjie Zhang, Zican Dong, et al.
A survey of large language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.18223, 2023.
